Blog post announcing new TrafficExtension API (#17351)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2026/traffic-extension-api/index.md

---
title: "Introducing the TrafficExtension API"
description: A new unified API for extending Istio proxies with WebAssembly and Lua, supporting both sidecar and ambient mode.
publishdate: 2026-05-07
attribution: "Liam White - Docusign"
keywords: [istio, wasm, lua, extensibility, ambient, traffic extension]
target_release: 1.30
---

> Mesh extensibility has always been a core tenet of Istio's design. By allowing users to inject custom logic directly into the data plane, Istio enables a wide range of use cases for performing custom authentication, collecting specialized telemetry, or transforming requests and responses on-the-fly. Until now Istio's only dedicated extensibility API was `WasmPlugin` which served Wasm-based extensions. However, users leveraging Lua scripts could only do so indirectly via `EnvoyFilter`, a powerful but complex and error-prone mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mesh extensibility has always been a core tenet of Istio's design. By allowing users to inject custom logic directly into the data plane, Istio enables a wide range of use cases for performing custom authentication, collecting specialized telemetry, or transforming requests and responses on-the-fly. Until now Istio's only supported extensibility API was `WasmPlugin`, which served WebAssembly-based extensions. Users who wanted to leverage Lua scripts could only do so indirectly via `EnvoyFilter`, a low-level mechanism that is powerful but easy to misconfigure.
```

> Istio 1.30 introduces the `TrafficExtension` API — a single, unified API for Wasm and Lua extensions across both sidecar and ambient deployments.

Reviewer: Nowhere does this say that you can only use this API on Layer 7 traffic (or with Envoy, for that matter, given there is a [newly supported gateway implementation](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/59209))

```suggestion
Istio 1.30 introduces the `TrafficExtension` API — a single, unified API for configuring Wasm and Lua extensions across both sidecar and ambient mode deployments.
```

but I'd still add a sentence somewhere...

Author: Good point! I have adjusted this sentence and added a bit below in `TrafficExtension` section covering the layer 7 stuff.

## What is TrafficExtension?

> `TrafficExtension` is a new Kubernetes CRD (`extensions.istio.io/v1alpha1`) that is recommended over `WasmPlugin` as the primary extensibility mechanism. It supports two extension types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TrafficExtension` is a new Istio API that replaces `WasmPlugin` as the primary proxy extensibility mechanism. It supports two extension types:
```

- **Lua scripts** — inline Lua scripts embedded directly in the resource, executed within Envoy with no module distribution required. Best for simple header manipulation, logging, and conditional logic.
- **WebAssembly plugins** — Proxy-Wasm sandbox modules loaded dynamically from OCI image registries. Supports multiple languages (Go, Rust, C++, AssemblyScript) and is recommended for complex processing, policy enforcement, telemetry collection, and payload mutations.

See the [TrafficExtension concepts page](/docs/concepts/extensibility/trafficextension/) for detailed guidance on choosing between Lua and Wasm for your use case.

> Note: `TrafficExtension` is currently **alpha** — the API may change before stabilization. Feedback is welcome.

Reviewer: WasmPlugin was perma-Alpha too, so it might be worth clarifying the status and the timeline expected

Author: Timeline is somewhat driven by user uptake. Docusign will be using the feature in sidecar mode but will need some usage in waypoint until we're confident enough to move it to beta. I have removed this line for now.

      end
{{< /text >}}

### WebAssembly

Wasm modules are loaded from OCI registries. The following example applies basic authentication to the `/productpage` path using a prebuilt Wasm plugin:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: extensions.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: TrafficExtension
metadata:
  name: basic-auth
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      istio: ingressgateway
  phase: AUTHN
  wasm:
    url: oci://ghcr.io/istio-ecosystem/wasm-extensions/basic_auth:1.12.0
    pluginConfig:
      basic_auth_rules:
        - prefix: "/productpage"
          request_methods: ["GET", "POST"]
          credentials: ["ok:test"]
{{< /text >}}

Prebuilt Wasm extensions are available in the [Istio ecosystem repository](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/wasm-extensions). To build your own, see the [Proxy-Wasm SDKs](https://github.com/proxy-wasm).

## Targeting

`TrafficExtension` supports two targeting mechanisms suited to different deployment modes.

**`selector`** targets sidecar proxies using label selectors. A resource created in `istio-system` applies cluster-wide; a resource in any other namespace applies only to workloads in that namespace.

> **`targetRefs`** targets Gateways or Services directly — required for ambient mode waypoint proxies, which do not use label-based injection. The same basic-auth extension applied to an ambient Gateway looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`targetRefs`** targets Gateways or Services directly — required for ambient mode waypoint proxies, which do not use map to workloads using label-based selectors. The same `basic-auth` extension applied to an ambient Gateway looks like this:
```

spec:
  targetRefs:
    - kind: Gateway
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      name: bookinfo-gateway
  phase: AUTHN
  wasm:
    url: oci://ghcr.io/istio-ecosystem/wasm-extensions/basic_auth:1.12.0
    pluginConfig:
      basic_auth_rules:
        - prefix: "/productpage"
          request_methods: ["GET", "POST"]
          credentials: ["ok:test"]
{{< /text >}}

## Ordering extensions

When multiple extensions target the same proxy, `phase` and `priority` control execution order.

`phase` places the extension at a known point in the filter chain:

| Phase | Position |
|-------|----------|
| `AUTHN` | Authentication phase |
| `AUTHZ` | Authorization phase |
| `STATS` | Statistics/observability phase |
| *(unset)* | Near the router (default) |

Within a phase, `priority` breaks ties — higher values run earlier in the request path.

## Migrating from WasmPlugin

`TrafficExtension` supersedes `WasmPlugin` as the recommended extensibility API. Existing `WasmPlugin` resources are fully compatible with the new API — in fact, Istio now internally transforms all `WasmPlugin` resources into `TrafficExtension` resources before distributing configuration to Envoy.

> There is no forced migration in Istio 1.30. When you are ready to migrate, the [TrafficExtension API reference](/docs/reference/config/proxy_extensions/v1alpha1/traffic_extension/) documents the full spec.

Reviewer: This page (https://preliminary.istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/proxy_extensions/v1alpha1/traffic_extension/) isn't correctly showing in the existing navigation hierarchy?

<img width="305" height="216" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e9ab6aa7-73f0-4c24-8b2b-c519fff8678b" />

Author: Had to PR a fix to the API repo but it should be fixed
